# Making this website - a premortem

It's clearly not finished. There's a lot of things I want to deal with at some
point: saving your color theme setting is the first that comes to mind. I have
some ideas of how to do that in a javascript-free way, most of them involving
cookies or localstorage. I just have to consider the legal and performance
related implications first. The listing of blog posts could also bear to look a
lot nicer, and I want to get some syntax highligting in my code snippets. But
it's up! It's the first website I've made and deployed outside of work. I can
properly consider myself a citizen of the web now.

## Why?

Well, I started thinking about getting a personal website like this a long time
ago. Besides the fact that I like making websites, I buy into the idea that
this is something everyone should have, ideally, instead of resorting to
hosting your ideas and showing off pictures you're proud of on giant social
media platforms that control what you see and manipulate the timelines to
maximise... who knows what they're trying to maximise. Through pursuing these
hidden motives though, they end up causing some pretty bad stuff on their
platforms: promoting heated arguments and polarising opinions, encouraging the
most outrage possible, because that's what people engage with. Much like
tabloids, except they get to waive all responsibility for fact-checking and
journalistic ethics because they didn't write the sensationalist headlines
themselves. Even tabloids would probably draw the line at breeding violent
extremism. I want no part of it and that's why I'm here instead of on facebook
or twitter.

## How?

About a year ago, I stumbled across a framework called
[react-static](http://react-static.js.org). I read about it, and saw that it built
upon ideas from something called next.js, but focused in more on the static
generation use case. If you're unfamiliar, static site generation (SSG) is when
you have some tool you run that takes arbitrary data, and compiles it into a
bunch of html, js, css, and potential other files, all bundled in a directory
that is ready to serve with a regular webserver like apache or nginx, as
opposed to rendering the whole page on some server each time a client requests
the page (that's SSR - server side rendering) like PHP typically does, or even
rendering it on the client with javascript after they have received the
response (client side rendering, or CSR). Many SSG frameworks these days
combine SSG with CSR that kicks in after the page has loaded, and takes care of
rendering the rest of the site once the user starts interacting and navigating
around. Spoiler - that's the approach used by this site.

Static generation is especially well suited for blogs, since the site's content
rarely changes, and so it would be wasteful to render it on every request, when
I can just render my whole site ahead of time, once per every new blog post. I
hope it won't be too rare an occation though. I'll try to make a habit of
posting here every once in a while. Inspired by this newly discovered
technology, I started experimenting with using it. I was impressed at how it
combined the power of classical static site generation with the expressiveness
and flexibility of react, which I had been using professionaly for some time to
make more involved interactive webapps that would have had no benefit from
being prerendered.

Due to reasons I can't quite remember, I decided react-static wasn't all that
I had hoped it would be, so I decided to check out that
[next.js](https://nextjs.org) thing it was inspired by. I was equally impressed
by it, this time because of how easy to use and intuitive it was (when used in
the way they want you to). But the gripes listed by the developers of
react-static were there. It simply wasn't a first priority to target fully
static sites, instead next.js focused on a hybrid between SSR and CSR. Also, I
was a little deterred by how they really push you towards using their hosting
solution. I just wanted a static site. Half the point of having a static site
is that it can be hosted anywhere, by any webserver.

Who are _they_, you ask?

next.js was and is developed by a company then called Zeit, now rebranded as
Vercel. They provide hosting and deployment services for serverless sites and
webapps. They promise fast load times courtesy of edge node hosting and smart
caching defaults, and easy deployment through their git integrations. I wasn't
particularily interested. There are many companies that provide these services
and I wasn't keen on picking one based on how well they had integrated their
marketing in an open source tool. I shopped around a bit, leaning towards using
Firebase unless I found something better, but at this point I kind of lost
interest in the project.

## The plague

Fast forward to 2021. Covid has made my time at university a bit less exciting
than I had anticipated. Pretty much all extracurricular activities are
canceled. I never see my classmates. It's all Zoom and Sharepoint and poring
over books all day long. Boredom finally sets in, and I begin to miss working
in the web field, so I decide to revisit this project. Now, next.js has
released version 10, and I discover _they_ have really delivered on the SSG
front. This time, next.js does exactly what I want it to do: take the markdown
I commit right into the source tree, and turn it into blog posts, statically,
and it can even generate a static list of all blog posts for the menu page
which was one of the things I couldn't figure out a year ago.

I've also been interested in using Cloudflare's WASM workers for something for
a while, if nothing else than to have an excuse for writing Rust. I figured I
could use them to host the site, but upon discovering that
[wrangler](https://github.com/cloudflare/wrangler), the tool they provide for
deploying and managing your workers, was broken in more ways than one I just
gave up and deployed the site to Vercel, and that's how you're reading this
now. Fortunately, for a personal website like this, the bill comes down to the
very affordable amount of 0. I just pay $9.95 per year to Cloudflare for the
domain name. So after that essay on the history behind the site, let's get into
what makes it tick.

## The code

One benefit that SSG and SSR both bring, is that you don't need to run any
javascript at all to see the resulting website. It's passed in a
ready-to-display state over the wire as html and css along with whatever images
and other assets you throw in there. There's a small but adamant group of
people that refuse to run any javascript whatsoever on their computers. I
thought it would be an interesting challenge to see how well I could adhere to
these demands while simultaneously making the blog exactly what I would want
from a blog. That isn't to say a lot, but client side routing is nice to have
in my mind. Smartphones have not-insignificant network latency, and it really
makes a difference if the device itself has what it needs to render a page
before you navigate to it, instead of making a request and waiting for the
response. I also appreciate any text-focused website that provides a dark mode
for tired eyes. next.js takes care of client side routing for me, in a way that
doesn't interfere with the experience of noscript users, but what about dark
mode? This was a great excuse for me to brush up my css skills. I had the idea
to use a checkbox element, which would serve as the toggle button, and then
apply some css selector that replaces css variables used by all other elements
to choose their colors.

```css
#root {
  --background: white;
  --foreground: black;
}

#darkmode:checked :root {
  --background: black;
  --foreground: white;
}
```

There's just one problem with this code though: the checkbox has to be inside
the root, not the other way around. And there's no way in css to style a parent
element on the condition of some state on a child element. So I came up with
putting a hidden checkbox as far up the tree as I could reach, and used a label
in the header menu to act as a stand in for the button itself. It's a hack and
it's not great for keyboard accessibility, which is something I want to come
back to and fix, but it will have to work for now. Then I could easily style
the whole page by using the sibling selector:

```css
#darkmode:checked ~ * {
  --background: black;
  --foreground: white;
}
```

```tsx
<nav>
  <NavLink href="/">Start</NavLink>
  <NavLink href="/blog">Blog</NavLink>
  <label htmlFor="darkmode">Darkmode</label>
</nav>
```

I also threw in some css transitions on the changing colors for good measure.
[The source is available on github](https://github.com/iwikal/iwikal.net).
It's not free software, at least not yet - I haven't figured out what kind of
license I should use. I don't necessarily want to apply the same license to the
code and the contents of my blog posts, so it will require some closer
consideration. Maybe I'll keep it proprietary, but don't let that stop you from
stealing ideas from the code. Not that there's a lot to it.

For this project, I went with the low-tech solution of just styling things with
regular old stylesheets, mostly selecting on element types, instead of using
classnames for everything. It's been a positive experience so far, but I
wouldn't be surprised if I decide to employ some other pattern down the road as
the site continues to evolve. I've liked using css-in-js and sometimes
[styled-components](https://styled-components.com) in the past, but I wanted to
try something different this time. I think it encourages me to have more
consistent styles, if I have to go through extra steps to make certain links
look different than others.

The code that generates the list of posts is interesting. Apparently, next.js
has some kind of code transform that allows you to write server side code and
client side code in the same file, without having to worry about what kinds of
imports you're allowed to use where. To my surprise, it _just worked_. Let me
show you:

```tsx
import { GetStaticPropsResult } from 'next'
import { promisify } from 'util'
import fs from 'fs'
import path from 'path'
import simpleGit from 'simple-git'
import Link from 'next/link'

interface Post {
  date: string
  slug: string
  title: string
}

interface BlogProps {
  posts: Post[]
}

export default function Blog({ posts }: BlogProps) {
  return (
    <>
      <h1>A blog about my occasional forays into userland and webspace.</h1>
      <ul>
        {posts.map((post) => (
          <li key={post.slug}>
            <Link href={`/blog/${post.slug}`}>
              {`${post.date.replace(/T.*/, '')} ${post.title}`}
            </Link>
          </li>
        ))}
      </ul>
    </>
  )
}

export async function getStaticProps(): Promise<
  GetStaticPropsResult<BlogProps>
> {
  const git = simpleGit()
  const postsDir = path.join(process.cwd(), 'pages/blog')
  const filenames = await promisify(fs.readdir)(postsDir)

  const readfile = promisify(fs.readFile)

  async function postFromName(filename: string): Promise<Post> {
    const file = path.join(postsDir, filename)
    const datePromise = git.log({ file }).then((log) => {
      switch (log.total) {
        case 0:
          return new Date().toISOString()
        default:
          return new Date(log.all[log.total - 1].date).toISOString()
      }
    })

    const titlePromise = readfile(file, 'utf8').then((contents) => {
      if (!contents) return 'This post is empty'

      const lines = contents.split('\n')
      const matches = lines.find((line) => line.match(/#[^#]/))
      return matches.slice(1).trim()
    })

    return {
      date: await datePromise,
      slug: filename.replace('.mdx', ''),
      title: await titlePromise,
    }
  }

  const posts = await Promise.all(filenames.map(postFromName))
  posts.sort((a, b) => b.date.localeCompare(a.date))

  return { props: { posts } }
}
```

See that big `async function getStaticProps`? It's server side code. And so is
the component itself, when statically generating the site. But it also takes
the component, strips it of any server side specific stuff, and puts it in the
bundle of javascript that gets shipped to the client, so that it can client
side render the page. It also ships the computed props in json form, which is
why you're only allowed to put serializable things in there.

This is how I'm able to just use the regular old node.js `fs` module to list
the directory of blog posts, strip away the mdx extension, and use the
filenames to generate links to the individual posts. I also use
[simple-git](https://github.com/steveukx/git-js) to search the log for when I
first commited the post, and grab the date. In case I haven't committed the
post yet, I use today's date so that it doesn't crash while I'm writing the
post. I'm not entirely convinced this very simplistic system won't cause issues
down the line, but it works for now.

That's all I can think of writing about this site, so it's time to get back to
studying for physics finals. Wish me luck!
